JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Did ExxonMobil mislead
the public about its
climate change research? New
York's attorney general lays out
details of his new
investigation,
and an Exxon vice
president responds.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: in the footsteps of our
ancestors. Journalist Paul
Salopek walks around the world
to uncover humans' prehistoric
journey.
PAUL SALOPEK, Fellow, National
Geographic: The walk has opened
up the vista to me in
both space and time, where I can
see the connections between all
of these stories and I see how
history informs everything
that's happening today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And "Breaking
Bad" actor Bryan Cranston talks
about playing a blacklisted
screenwriter at the height of
the Red Scare in the 1950s.
BRYAN CRANSTON, Actor: A lot of
people will look back and say
that he's a hero. There
are other people who will say,
he was no hero, he's a dirty red
commie or whatever. And I
suppose the point of the movie
is that all opinions are
welcome.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Republicans prepared
today for their fourth
presidential debate, this time
in Milwaukee. The top eight
polling candidates, a smaller
field than before, will face off
on economic issues on FOX
Business Network at 9:00 Eastern
time. Lower-polling candidates
meet earlier.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama
administration will ask the U.S.
Supreme Court to let it protect
five million immigrants from
deportation. That's after a
federal appeals court panel
ruled against the president's
executive orders to do just
that. Monday's ruling upheld an
injunction issued by a
federal judge in Texas.
Today, White House spokesman
Josh Earnest said the
administration is determined to
continue
the fight.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: We're quite
disappointed in the decision
that
was rendered by the Fifth
Circuit, but it did not in any
way diminish the confidence
that we have in the power of our
legal argument. And we're
looking forward to having an
opportunity
making that argument again
before the Supreme Court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In all, 26 states
have challenged the president's
actions on immigration, saying
they illegally
circumvent Congress.
GWEN IFILL: The Senate
overwhelmingly passed a defense
bill today that includes a ban
on
moving Guantanamo Bay detainees
to the United States. It's the
latest obstacle to President
Obama's pledge to close the
detention facility before he
leaves office. Still, the White
House said he will sign the $600
billion measure because of other
important provisions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The worst El Nino
weather pattern in decades could
threaten 11 million children
in Africa with hunger, disease
and drought. The United Nations
Children's Fund, UNICEF,
issued that warning today.
In a statement, it said: "The
consequences could ripple
through generations, unless
affected
communities receive support."
The weather pattern has already
caused severe drought in
Ethiopia and flooding in
Somalia.
GWEN IFILL: In Myanmar, official
results from Sunday's elections
kept trickling in today,
as the opposition claimed a
landslide win. The country's
constitution bars opposition
leader Aung San Suu Kyi
from becoming president.
But she told Singapore's Channel
News Asia she expects to be the
de facto leader.
AUNG SAN SUU KYI, Myanmar
Opposition Leader: In any
democratic country, it's the
leader
of the winning party who becomes
the leader of the government,
and if this constitution
doesn't allow it, then we will
have to make arrangements so
that we can proceed along
usual democratic lines.
GWEN IFILL: Myanmar's military
gave way to an elected regime in
2011, but it retains
control of key parts
of the government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia now says
its ban on flights to Egypt will
last at least the next
several months over security
concerns. A Russian airliner
crashed in the Sinai Peninsula
on
October 31 after taking off from
Sharm el-Sheikh. All 224 people
on board were killed. U.S.
and British officials say it's
likely a bomb destroyed the
plane.
GWEN IFILL: Russian sports
officials are denying
accusations of widespread doping
among track
and field athletes. The World
Anti-Doping Agency said
yesterday that Moscow has
allowed
a state-sponsored drug culture.
Today, the head of the country's
athletics federation dismissed
the report and said it
shouldn't block Russian athletes
from next year's Olympics.
VADIM ZELICHENOK, Acting
President, Russian Athletics
Federation (through translator):
I am sorry. I want to ask once
again, what are these athletes
guilty of? They have never
had any record of doping
violations. Why should they be
deprived of this opportunity
because
of the corruption you have
mentioned and which had taken
place several years ago? In any
case, currently,
it doesn't exist.
GWEN IFILL: President Vladimir
Putin will meet with the head of
the Russian Track Federation
tomorrow. Today, Putin's
spokesman said the accusations
appear to be -- quote -- "rather
unfounded."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Federal
prosecutors in New York have
charged three people in a huge
theft
of consumer data from the
nation's biggest bank. An
indictment unsealed today said
two
Israelis and an American stole
information on more than 80
million households and small
business customers at J.P.
Morgan Chase. The crimes were
carried out between 2012 and
this
past summer.
GWEN IFILL: This was a sluggish
day on Wall Street. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
27 points to close near 17760.
The Nasdaq lost 12 points, and
the S&P 500 added three.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's word this
evening former President Jimmy
Carter is responding well
to cancer treatment. A
spokeswoman says doctors have
found no sign of new tumors. Mr.
Carter
is 91. He announced last August
that he'd been diagnosed with
cancer that spread to
his brain.
GWEN IFILL: We are also
marking two passings of note.
Former West German Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt died at his home
in Hamburg. Schmidt led West
Germany from 1974 to 1982,
through economic turbulence and
Cold War tensions. He also
backed the U.S. boycott of the
Moscow Olympics in 1980, but
said later that nothing was
gained
from it. Helmut Schmidt
was 96 years old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And legendary New
Orleans musician Allen Toussaint
died in Spain today after
a heart attack. He was a pianist
and performer who wrote and
produced a long line of hits
for himself and others,
including "Working in a Coal
Mine" and "Lady Marmalade."
Here he is recording "Who's
Gonna Help Brother Get Further?"
for a 2006 album with Elvis
Costello, as seen in
a BBC documentary.
(MUSIC)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Toussaint joined
the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
in 1998 and was awarded
the National Humanities Medal in
2013. At his death, he was 77
years old.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour": accused of a
cover-up, Exxon's own research
on climate change; the largest
strike yet for a $15 minimum
wage; the man who's walking
across the world, and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: First, a new tack
in the battle over climate
change: going after energy
companies
for alleged financial fraud.
New York State Attorney General
Eric Schneiderman recently
subpoenaed oil giant ExxonMobil,
apparently seeking documents
that might show the company had
downplayed the risks to profits
and therefore to investors of
stronger regulations on burning
fossil fuels. Exxon's history
has
been the subject of recent
reporting by Inside Climate
News, The Los Angeles Times and
others.
The reporting has alleged the
company misled the public about
what its own scientists found
about the risks of climate
change and greenhouse gases.
Here is a clip of a video
produced by PBS' "Frontline" in
collaboration with Inside
Climate
News, a not-for-profit
journalism organization that
covers energy and the
environment.
MAN: Proponents of the global
warming theory say that higher
levels of greenhouse gases
are causing world temperatures
to rise and that burning fossil
fuels is the reason.
The scientific evidence remains
inconclusive as to whether human
activities affect the
global climate.
WOMAN: We found a trail of
comes that go back to 1977.
Exxon knew carbon dioxide was
increasing in the atmosphere,
that combustion of fossil
fuels was driving it, and that
this posed a threat to Exxon. At
that time, Exxon understood
very quickly that governments
would probably take action to
reduce fossil fuel consumption.
They're smart people, great
scientists, and they saw the
writing on the wall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's a
"Frontline" excerpt.
I spoke earlier this evening
with New York State Attorney
General Eric Schneiderman.
Welcome, Attorney General
Eric Schneiderman.
Let me just begin by asking in
-- what is it that ExxonMobil
has done, in your view,
that caused you to launch
this investigation?
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN, New York
Attorney General: We have been
looking at the energy sector
generally for a number of years,
and have -- had several
investigations that relate
to the phenomenon of global
warming, climate change, and the
human contribution to it.
So we have subpoenaed, issued a
broad subpoena to Exxon because
of public statements they
have made and how they have
really shifted their point of
view on this in terms of their
public presentation and public
reporting over the last few
decades.
In the 1980s, they were putting
out some very good studies about
climate change. They were
compared to Bell Labs as being
at the leadership of doing good
scientific work. And then they
changed tactics for some reason,
and their numerous statements
over the last 20 years
or so that question climate
change, whether it's happening,
that claim that there is no
competent model for
climate change.
So we're very interested in
seeing what science Exxon has
been using for its own purposes,
because they're tremendously
active in offshore oil drilling
in the Arctic, for example,
where
global warming is happening at a
much more rapid rate than in
more temperate zones. Were
they using the best science and
the most competent models for
their own purposes, but then
telling
the public, the regulators and
shareholders, that no competent
models existed?
Things like that. We're
interested in what they were
using internally and what they
were
telling the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what law
would be violated by doing this?
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN: Well, in New
York, we have laws against
defrauding the public,
defrauding
consumers, defrauding
shareholders.
We're at the beginning of the
investigation. We have to see
what documents are in there,
but certainly all of the claims
would lie in some form of fraud.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I'm sure
you're not surprised to know
Exxon is categorically denying
this.
The CEO, Rex Tillerson, said
this week nothing could be
further from the truth.
In the company's written
statement, they start out by
saying for many years, they have
included
all the information they have
about the risks of climate
change in their public filings,
in their reports
to shareholders.
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN: We know that
they have been issuing public
statements that are at
odds with that, and that they
have been funding organizations
that are even more aggressive
climate change deniers.
And they have made numerous
statement, both Exxon officials
and in Exxon reports, but
also through these organizations
they fund, like the American
Enterprise Institute, ALEC,
the American Legislative
Exchange Council, through their
activities with the American
Petroleum Institute, so
directory and through other
organizations, Exxon has said a
lot
of things that conflict with the
statement that they have always
been forthcoming about
the realities of climate change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me read
you, Attorney General
Schneiderman, something else
that
Exxon has been saying where they
reacted to some of the reporting
that was done on this
which is similar to
what you're describing.
They say these are allegations
based on what they call
deliberately cherry-picked
statements
attributed to various ExxonMobil
employees to wrongly suggest
that conclusions were reached
decades ago by researchers. He
said they were statements taken
completely out of context
and ignored other available
statements at the same time.
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN: Well, then
they should welcome this
investigation, because, unlike
journalists, my staff is going
to get to read all of the
documents in context, and they
will have an opportunity to
explain the context of the
statements and whether there are
contradictions
or not.
So, we're at the very beginning
stages. We don't want to
prejudge what we're going to
find, but the public record is
troubling enough that we brought
-- that we decided we had
to bring this investigation.
Another area that -- where they
have been active and we're
concerned about is
overestimating
the costs of switching to
renewable energy. They have
issued reports, one as recently
as last year in response to
shareholder requests and public
requests, estimating that
switching
over to renewables by the end of
this century would raise energy
costs, to the point that
they would cost -- they would be
44 percent of the median income
of an American family.
We want to see how they arrived
at that conclusion, which we
believe to be vastly overstated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you draw a
line between ExxonMobil doing
research and talking openly
about the debate out there about
what is known about climate
change, and on the other hand
advocating for policies that
they think are going to be
better for their own bottom
line?
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN: Well, there's
nothing wrong with advocating
for your own company.
What you're not allowed to do is
commit fraud. You're not allowed
to have the best climate
change science that you're using
to build -- in your planning of
offshore oil towers
in the Arctic, where you have to
take into account rising sea
levels and the melting
of the permafrost and things
like that. If you're using that
internally, but what you're
putting out to the world,
directly and through these
climate denial organizations, is
completely
in conflict with
that, that's not OK.
JUDY WOODRUFF: New York State
Attorney General Eric Schmitt,
we thank you.
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And joining me
now is Kenneth Cohen. He is vice
president for public and
government affairs with
ExxonMobil Corporation.
Kenneth Cohen, welcome.
Let me just begin by asking flat
out, has Exxon in any way misled
or been dishonest
with the public about what it
knows about climate change?
KENNETH COHEN, Vice President
for Public and Government
Affairs, ExxonMobil: Well, Judy,
first, thank you for the
invitation to come on tonight's
program.
And I also appreciate opening
with that question, because the
answer is a simple no. And what
the facts will show is that the
company has been engaged for
many decades in a two-pronged
activity here.
First, we take the risks of
climate change seriously. And we
also have been working to
understand the science of
climate change. And that
activity started in the late
'70s
and has continued up to the
present time. Our scientists
have produced over 150 papers,
50 of which have been part of
peer-reviewed publications.
Our scientists participate in
the U.N.'s climate body. We have
been participating in the U.N.
activities beginning in 1988,
running through the present
time. At the same time, we have
also been engaged in
discussions on policy.
And in the discussions on
policy, for example, in the late
'90s, we were part of a large
business coalition that opposed
adoption in the U.S. of the
Kyoto protocol. Now, why did
we do that? We opposed the Kyoto
protocol because it would have
exempted from its application
over two-thirds of the world's
emitters. Think about that. And
that was in 1997.
Going forward, if that policy
were in effect today, it would
have excluded almost 80 percent
of the world's emissions. So
that wasn't a good policy
approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about one of the points that
the attorney general
made. He said Exxon over the
last few decades, in his words,
has shifted tactics, from taking
climate change seriously,
engaging in serious research,
to, he said, much more recently
questioning whether
it's happening at all.
Is that an accurate, a fair
description of the shift that's
taken place?
KENNETH COHEN: No, it's not.
And the facts are as follows.
We have endeavored with -- to
understand the science of this
very complex subject, as I
mentioned, beginning in the '70s
and running to the present time.
This is a very complex
area. This is a very
complex system, climate.
What we discovered, what our
scientists discovered, working
in conjunction with the U.S.
government,
with the Department of Energy,
working in conjunction with some
of the leading research
institutions around the world in
the '70s and the '80s, was that
the tools available
the science to get a handle on
the risk, these tools needed to
develop, and we, for example,
were part of developing, working
with others, some of the complex
modeling that is used
today.
And, today, that work continues.
Now, on the policy side, we have
to remember that ExxonMobil
is a large energy provider, one
of the world's largest energy
companies. We have a two-pronged
challenge in front of us. We
produce energy that the modern
world runs on.
And what we strive to do is
produce that energy while at the
same time reducing the
environmental
footprint associated with our
operations and, most
importantly, with consumers' use
of the
energy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I think
people understand that, but I
think what is striking was his
-- was the attorney general's
comment that Exxon -- what he's
concerned about and wants
to know is whether Exxon was
using one set of scientific
models to do its work in the
Arctic, for example, where Exxon
has been engaged in drilling,
and on the other hand
telling the public, telling its
shareholders a very different
set of facts about the state
of climate change.
KENNETH COHEN: Well, the facts
will show that the company has
been engaged with, not only
on our own, but with -- in
conjunction with some of the
leading researchers.
Our view of this very complex
subject over the years, over the
decades has mirrored that
of the broader scientific
community. That is to say, the
discussions that have taken
place inside our company, among
our scientists mirror the
discussions that have been
taking
place and the work that's been
taking place by the broader
scientific community.
That's what the facts will show.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just final
question. He made a point of
saying that Exxon has funded a
number of organizations that he
said that have been openly
climate change deniers. He
mentioned the American
Enterprise Institute. He
mentioned the American Petroleum
Institute
and the American
Legislative Exchange.
Has Exxon been funding
these organizations?
KENNETH COHEN: Well, the answer
is yes. And I will let those
organizations respond for
themselves.
But I will tell you that what we
have been engaged in, both -- we
have been focused on
understanding the science,
participating with the broader
scientific community in
developing
the science, while at the same
time participating in
understanding what would be and
working
with policy-makers on what would
be appropriate policy responses
to this evolving body of
science.
That's why we were involved with
large business coalitions
challenging the adoption of the
Kyoto protocol in the United
States. And we then moved to
oppose, for example, early
adoption
of cap-and-trade approaches in
the U.S. One of the earlier
approaches in the last decade
would have exempted, for
example, coal from its
operations.
So we favor the adoption --
policy-makers should consider
policy and should adopt policy.
We have disclosed the risks of
climate change to our investors
beginning in the middle part
of the last decade and
extending to the present time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kenneth Cohen,
vice president for ExxonMobil,
we appreciate having your
point of view, as we do the
New York attorney general.
Thank you.
KENNETH COHEN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: As New York Governor
Andrew Cuomo moved to raise that
state's minimum wage to
$15 an hour today, a national
battle over pay played out from
coast to coast, as fast
food and other low-wage workers
took their protests to the
streets.
Thousands of workers pushing for
an increase in the minimum wage
were expected to walk
off the job in as many as 270
cities today, with protests in
more than 200 others.
WOMAN: Maybe I wouldn't have to
work two jobs, and maybe I
wouldn't have to work seven days
a week, you know, or even
sometimes we work on holidays
just to make a little holiday
pay extra.
GWEN IFILL: Organizers who favor
raising the federal wage to $15
an hour planned for today's
actions to be the largest strike
ever by employees of the fast
food industry.
The federal minimum wage has
been set at $7.25 an hour since
2009. Democratic presidential
candidates Martin O'Malley and
Bernie Sanders back the $15
push.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: They
have had the impact of moving
Los Angeles
and San Francisco and other
cities to raise the minimum
wage. They are doing it.
GWEN IFILL: But some Democrats
say the hike should be lower,
$12 an hour, in part because
some cities and states have
raised minimums on their own.
Hillary Clinton and Labor
Secretary
Tom Perez have said they support
a $12 measure now in Congress.
But many businesses and most
Republicans say raising the
wage that high would cost jobs.
Nearly all of the Republican
candidates who will debate in
Milwaukee tonight support
keeping
the minimum wage well
below $15 an hour.
Continuing our coverage of this
ongoing debate, we turn tonight
to a prominent labor economist
who believes wages should be
raised, but not so fast and not
so high.
Alan Krueger is the former
chairman of President Obama's
Council of Economic Advisers,
and
he's now a professor of
economics and public affairs at
Princeton University.
Welcome, Professor Krueger.
You have written that the $15
raise -- you have written that
raising the minimum wage
to $15 an hour is a risk not
worth taking. Why is it not?
ALAN KRUEGER, Former Chairman,
White House Council of Economic
Advisers: Well, first
of all, Gwen, I would draw a
distinction between the worker
activism that you highlighted at
the beginning and the
federal minimum wage.
I think it's wonderful to see
workers get more engaged. We
have a long tradition in
this country of promoting worker
voice, worker activism to
support their own pay. And I
think
there are certainly some sectors
that can handle a $15-an-hour
minimum, but at a national
level, I think that's
a different story.
And just to give you an example,
the research I did two decades
ago with David Card of Berkeley,
we looked at what happened when
the minimum wage in New Jersey
went from $4.25 an hour
to $5.15 an hour, which is the
equivalent today of going from
$7.25 to $8.60 an hour,
very far from $15.
And what we found was that an
increase at this more moderate
level, well above where
it is today, didn't have an
adverse effect on employment.
Other studies have reached
a similar conclusion.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Pardon me.
ALAN KRUEGER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: So you're suggesting
-- just moving it to today for a
moment -- that the difference
between $12 and $15
an hour is what?
ALAN KRUEGER: No, the point I'm
making is an increase to $12 at
a national level is
a considerable increase. It
would put the minimum wage above
where it's been in the
history of the United States.
And if you move it up to $15 an
hour nationwide, I'm concerned
that that is well beyond what
we have seen in past research.
And if I were advising the
president today, I would say
I think that's a risky level.
GWEN IFILL: Why is it even
necessary for there to be a
federal floor, when so many
states
and cities are stepping in?
That's what a lot of Republicans
are saying.
ALAN KRUEGER: Well, most of the
Republican candidates favor
keeping the minimum wage
where it is or getting rid of
it, from what I have heard in
the earlier debates. And I
hope they get asked
about that tonight.
We have in some sense a
nationwide labor market. The
minimum wage is a standard of
fairness.
We also use the minimum wage to
help redress the imbalance in
bargaining power between
employers and firms. And I think
if we abolish the federal
minimum wage, which is what you
asked about, you would have some
states that didn't have a
minimum wage at all or a very
low one, and that would be
unfair to other states that have
a higher minimum wage.
So we have a long history in the
U.S. of having a federal floor,
and raising it from time
to time. It's stalled
considerably after adjusting for
inflation in the 1980s. And I
think it's
only fair to put it back in real
terms where it was previously or
a bit above it.
GWEN IFILL: Well, risk is
obviously in the eye of the
beholder. And you say your
research
has shown that there will not be
jobs lost as a result of raising
the minimum wage even
to $12.
So, how do you support that
argument? Because it seems to
make sense that if you have to
pay more, that you're going to
have to employ fewer people.
ALAN KRUEGER: Well,
a couple of things.
One, you look around the world,
and countries that have raised
their minimum wage to around
that level have not seen job
losses. The best work most
recently has been done looking
at
the U.K., which has a low pay
commission, bipartisan
commission, employers, labor
groups,
academics, which repeatedly
finds no adverse effects from
raising the minimum wage, but
a big help for low-wage workers.
And at a theoretical level, the
labor market is not as
competitive as we often teach in
our first introductory lectures.
There are a lot of frictions in
the job market, and
what many employers find is that
with a higher minimum wage, they
have lower turnover. They
get more job applicants. They
can fill vacancies that they
have. Morale is higher.
Productivity
is higher, and that enables them
to afford the higher minimum
wage.
And I think that's the case up
to a certain level. And if the
minimum wage exceeds a certain
level, then I think you start
to find undesirable effects.
GWEN IFILL: All right, Alan
Krueger, thank you very much.
ALAN KRUEGER: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
ban on soccer headers, amid
fears of concussions; and actor
Bryan Cranston on his new film
about Hollywood and communism.
But, first, journalist Paul
Salopek spent his career
covering the news overseas and
jetting around the globe, until
he realized that walking around
the world might just give
him the deeper insights
he was searching for.
Hari Sreenivasan met up
with Salopek for a stroll.
PAUL SALOPEK, Fellow, National
Geographic: There is something
not in your brain, but
almost in your backbone, about
the rhythm of walking, this A/B,
A/B. It's the pace of
a heartbeat.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On a high
country cool morning, Paul
Salopek is out for a walk. But
his walk
is unlike any you or I might
take. On this morning, he is
nearing mile 4,000 of a trek
that began in January 2013 in
Ethiopia's Great Rift Valley,
the wellspring of ancient
humankind.
PAUL SALOPEK: This whole project
is about two things. It's about
the past and the future.
And the past element is
following our first ancestors
who spread out of Africa during
the Stone Age, so, following the
footsteps of some very old and
intrepid pioneers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He calls this
project the Out of Eden Walk,
and he will end it some
time in six or seven years at
the very southern tip of South
America, after logging 21,000
miles. That's about 30 million
footsteps, for those of you
counting yours every day.
The two-time Pulitzer
Prize-winning foreign
correspondent was used to
dropping into war
zones and driving his way out as
fast as possible. But so far on
this trip, he's walked through
some of the conflict zones of
the Middle East, now on an
assignment that is his lifetime.
With support from the National
Geographic Society, the Nieman
and Knight Foundations
and others, he has walked
across deserts and mountains.
So, why do this?
PAUL SALOPEK: There has got to
be a space to slow down, analyze
and absorb more meaningful
information. I don't think we
need more information. I think
we need more meaning.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What kind of
context are you able to get when
you are walking vs. when
we get there in cars
and planes and trains?
PAUL SALOPEK: Walking has shown
me that the boundaries between
stories are permeable,
in that one story bleeds into
another, because human life
bleeds into each other. And so
walking between stories shows me
connections that didn't -- I
didn't used to see when I
would parachute in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And what are
we saying? What is humanity
telling you?
PAUL SALOPEK: The same stories
over and over again. It's the
same classic stories of
complaint,
of joy, of aspiration, of hope,
of hopes dashed. And I never get
tired of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We caught up
with him in Southern Georgia's
Caucasus Mountains, near
Armenia, where the walk was
stopped late last fall at this
destroyed Soviet-era building.
PAUL SALOPEK: Last November, we
had just crossed the Turkish
border, and it was very bad
weather.
It was snowing, it was sleeting,
very cold both during the day
and at night. We came
down, and with frozen feet had
to break through a frozen river,
plunging in up to our thighs.
And we were very
afraid of hypothermia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Salopek and
three walking partners found
this "Spotlight". One man set
his gloves alight to start
a fire and stay warm.
PAUL SALOPEK: On a November
night a year ago, this was
heaven. This was better than a
five-star
hotel.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Then he waited
here in Tbilisi, the capital of
Georgia, for a lot longer than
he planned. He was stuck in what
he calls a
geopolitically-induced storm,
waiting for
visas that would determine
the rest of his route.
A hundred thousand years ago,
the problems were different
here, in this land littered
with volcanic boulders
from ancient eruptions.
PAUL SALOPEK: When our
ancestors, the first people who
walked out of Africa, passed
through
this region, their big obstacles
were glaciers and big animals
that would eat them or droughts
or famines. Today, mine is these
ethnic fault lines and these
imaginary walls, these imaginary
glaciers called borders. And
they have knocked me sideways,
way off my intended track.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Months of
back-and-forth talks with
regional governments made it
clear
that his original plan to walk
across Iran and points east
wouldn't work.
Finally, he set a route from
Georgia that will pass through
Azerbaijan, on to Kazakstan
and beyond.
PAUL SALOPEK: This doesn't look
like much, but this ruin on the
high plateau of Southern
Georgia is the beginning of
phase two of the Out of Eden
Walk. So, this is the gateway
to the Orient for me. From here,
I'm leaving the Caucasus, going
on the old silk roads
to China.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So at
mid-morning on October 20,
Salopek set out, with the world
revealed
before him one step after the
other, on this day up to a
mountain pass at more than 9,000
feet.
Down the other side, Salopek and
his walking partner spent the
night in the small village
of Mamishlari, a village of
ethnic Azeris from Azerbaijan.
They were taken in by the
Nasibov family; 72-year-old
Ziaudoin and his 70-year-old
wife, Azmat (ph), married as
teenagers.
It is a tough farm life, on the
edge, really, of civilization.
PAUL SALOPEK: We came around the
corner of this mountain river
and here was this village
that we didn't
even know existed.
The first reaction was
curiosity. When I finally told
him, well, actually, I have
hiked all
the way from Africa, that was
the surprise moment, and there
was laughter around that
table. And there was a lively
exchange about, oh, you have got
to be crazy.
ZIAUDOIN NASIBOV, Farmer
(through translator): I don't
think he is crazy. I actually
thought
he was quite enlightened,
because they actually want to
walk across the world and see
what's
out there. You might not notice
a place, but when you walk by on
foot, you see it, and
appreciate it for
what it actually is.
PAUL SALOPEK: Ziaud also has
basically joined the walk
because he showed us the way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All along his
route, Salopek has been joined
by walking partners, who
function
as guides, translators and
companions. In Georgia, that
partner was Dima Bit-Suleiman.
What is the reaction of most of
the people you bump into when
you tell them what he's
doing?
DIMA BIT-SULEIMAN, Guide: They
go like, yes, yes, yes, coming
from Africa. On walk? What
do you mean?
(LAUGHTER)
DIMA BIT-SULEIMAN: That's like,
usually, they kind of don't
believe and they say, why is
he doing it? What is
he trying to find out?
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
when they figure out that he is
trying to go to the end of
the world?
DIMA BIT-SULEIMAN: And then it's
even worse. And then they really
ask, like, what is he
searching for?
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
DIMA BIT-SULEIMAN: Like, why is
he doing that? I don't think
there is an easy answer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: After passing
through boggy lowlands, where
horsemen emerged from fairy
tale fogs, Salopek arrived
at a village, Ipnari.
Largely abandoned, it revealed a
much deeper history, nearby, a
Bronze Age wine store,
5,000-year-old fermentation
vats sunken in the ground.
PAUL SALOPEK: You're talking
about the beginning of
civilization. Georgians were
already drinking.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SALOPEK: The walk has
opened up the vista to me in
both space and time, where I can
see the connections between all
of these stories and I see how
history informs everything
that's
happening today.
Time pools in certain valleys,
and it runs like a river through
certain canyon systems,
certain plains. And every step
you take could be in a different
era. And so here we are
coming up to another one, and I
think that the task now is to
kind of go slowly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But, for now,
his steps were taking him toward
the village of Boslebi,
Georgia. And as the evening
gathered, Salopek explained one
mind-boggling facet of this
grand experiment.
More often than not, when he
sets out each morning, he has
little idea where he will
sleep that night.
PAUL SALOPEK: We're going to
draw attention, obviously, and
just start greeting people
and start striking
up conversations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it is this
exact moment, first contact in a
village, that Salopek was
hesitant to have us film up
close. It's hard making a first
impression with a camera crew
in tow.
This day, five minutes after
this scene and after meeting two
other people in town, they
both had a place to
stay for the night.
You don't plan out every step
of the way, so to speak.
PAUL SALOPEK: Yes, it's hard to
explain to readers who think
that I have got a team back
in the States with a big map
with blinking lights and
computers plotting out my route.
They would laugh if they saw how
seat-of-the-pants this is. This
is truly sort of strolling
across
the world, and seeing how far I
get before nightfall and then
looking for shelter. The
world is, by and large,
a hospitable place.
Merab (ph), this is my friend
Hari from the United States.
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hari.
Pleased to meet you.
Paul introduced me to his host
for the night before I arrived,
Merab Saaladze, a retired
deputy governor of the
local municipality.
You just invited him into your
home. He's a total stranger.
MERAB SAALADZE, Georgia (through
translator): I asked him who he
was, and he said he was
from the U.S., so I
immediately invited them in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is it common
to be this hospitable, to take
in a stranger?
MERAB SAALADZE: To me,
it was the first time.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: After tea and
a bit more conversation, we set
out for the next waypoint,
the ancient village of Dmanisi
about six miles away, which we
will tell you more about in
our next story.
MAN: So, basically, there is no
shortcut. Merab said, well, yes,
you have to cross the
river.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SALOPEK: OK.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But, as we
soon found out, even the most
precise directions need
updating,
which we were given by a man
with hands stained from a
lifetime of gathering walnuts.
And that, says Salopek,
is just part of the plan.
You have got GPS, you have got
maps, you have got guides. You
are still going the wrong
way sometimes.
PAUL SALOPEK: Yes.
Being found is overrated. Being
a little lost is good, because
it keeps you alert, keeps
you looking around. It keeps you
scanning the horizons about to
find your bearings,
and you are not sleepwalking
through the world.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how many
pairs of shoes do you think you
have gone through?
PAUL SALOPEK: This is the
fourth. Somebody brought me
these from the States, so
they're
kind of special.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Do you get
tired by the end of an average
day, or has your body gotten
used to this hiking pace?
PAUL SALOPEK: I do.
It depends on my physical
condition. You know, look, the
walk has kind of turned into my
life, so it's a complicated
question to answer. It's like
you -- you have good weeks and
bad
weeks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
PAUL SALOPEK: I think I'm
in pretty good condition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
PAUL SALOPEK: But I get tired,
and "my job" -- in quotes -- is
to write, not just really
to walk. So, at the end of the
day, it takes a special effort
to sit down and write a story.
My project, to walk across
the world for seven years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Those stories,
dispatches from this ambling
Eden, are being followed
online by a growing group
of digital companions.
Young people in particular,
students, catch up with Salopek
along the way. The tools of
the trade are the heaviest thing
he carries in his backpack: a
laptop, cameras, notebooks
and not more than a single
change of clothes. He stops
every 100 miles to record a
milestone,
a panoramic photo in this case
that includes an exhausted
"NewsHour" crew and a wayward
pig, then some video, and a
brief interview with the nearest
person.
This one, number 29, after 2,800
air miles traveled, came outside
a truck driver's house
near a Georgian mining town. And
after a few questions and a
handshake, Salopek is again
on his way, the rhythm restored.
What makes a human want to
go over the next ridge?
PAUL SALOPEK: Ah, the eternal
question, the one that probably
doesn't have a rational
answer through science.
The walk is part of that
exploration, the impulse, not
even rational to know what's
over the mountain. Why -- why
paddle into the sea? We have set
out again and again,
and nobody came back, and yet we
still set out. And one
scientist, geneticist said,
we're
just crazy.
And I think that magical,
wonderful craziness is part of
the joy of this project. It's
something
that also binds us together.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Hari Sreenivasan
in Southern Georgia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Places
we never get to see.
You can talk to Paul Salopek
yourself about his amazing
journey. Join us at 1:00 p.m.
Eastern on Friday for a Twitter
chat. Follow along using the
Twitter handles @NewsHour
and @outofedenwalk. Details are
on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: A new initiative
designed to make soccer safer
for young players was just
announced
by the U.S. Soccer Federation.
The new rule would set limits on
how much players could
use their heads to physically
hit the ball. The hope is that
it would reduce the number
of concussions and
head injuries.
William Brangham has more on the
changes and the emerging science
behind them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today, soccer
is one of the leading causes of
concussions for young
athletes in the U.S. It's not as
high as the concussion rate for
football, but it's close.
Tens of thousands of kids get
concussions playing soccer every
year, and heading the
ball is considered
a main culprit.
Under U.S. soccer's new rules,
kids under the age of 10 won't
be heading the ball at
all. Kids aged 11-13 will head
the ball much less in practice.
And there will be new rules
on injury substitutions during
games. Players 14 and up will
continue heading as always.
These new rules will resolve a
lawsuit brought last year
against U.S. soccer and others
by
a group of parents in California
who argued the groups weren't
doing enough to protect
kids from head injuries. Last
year, we reported on the rising
concern over concussions in
soccer and the push to limit
heading for young players.
Back then, I talked with one of
the leading scientists in the
field, Dr. Robert Cantu.
He's a neurosurgeon and
co-directs a brain study center
at Boston University. Cantu
acknowledged
that the science connecting
soccer and brain injury was
limited. He's in fact called for
much more research to be done.
But, even so, he's argued that
it's better to be safe and not
allow young kids to repeatedly
head the ball.
DR. ROBERT CANTU, Concussion
Legacy Foundation: If you took
heading out of soccer, it
wouldn't
be behind football in the
incidence of concussion. It
wouldn't even be in the
high-risk group.
It would be in a low-risk group.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Cantu told me
that heading the ball, as well
as the collisions and hard
falls to the ground they often
cause, are problematic for kids,
because, unlike adult
brains, kids' brains
are still developing.
DR. ROBERT CANTU: The young
brain is largely not myelinated.
Myelin is the coating of nerve
fibers that connect nerve cells.
Similar to coating on a
telephone wire, it helps
transmission
but it also gives strength.
And so when you violently shake
the young brain, you have a much
greater chance to disrupt
nerve fibers and their
connections than you do an adult
brain.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Cantu says a
kids head also sits on a much
less developed neck and torso
than an adult's does, so the
same blow might cause more
shaking to a kid's head than it
would to a grownup's.
DR. ROBERT CANTU: So, you've got
a bobblehead doll effect with
our youngsters, so that the
very minimal impact is now going
to set their brain in much more
motion than it would in
an adult brain with
a strong neck.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Cantu says
strengthening a kid's neck
muscles can help, but those
soccer
helmets and headgear that you
see on the market don't really
offer much protection, so he
says there's only one
thing left to do.
DR. ROBERT CANTU: Take the most
injurious activity for head
injury out of it, but let
the rest of the sport go on. And
that's playing soccer without
heading.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You can watch
the full report on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour. You can
also read a longer interview
with Dr. Cantu about concussions
in youth sports.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: The story of
a screenwriter comes to the
screen.
His name was Dalton Trumbo. And
his life and work were
intertwined with a controversial
period of film history.
Jeffrey Brown has a look at
Trumbo for the "NewsHour" at the
Movies.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dalton Trumbo was
one of the most successful
Hollywood screenwriters of
his generation. He was also an
activist in labor and other
causes who joined the Communist
Party in the 1940s.
As the Cold War consumed the
nation, Trumbo gained a new kind
of fame, as a member of
the so-called Hollywood 10,
writers, actors and others who
were brought before the
Congressional
House on Un-American Activities
Consulate and blacklisted by the
major studios.
Trumbo would spend almost a year
in prison, then, for nearly a
decade, could only work
using a pseudonym. One
screenplay during that time
written under the name Robert
Rich for
the film "The Brave Ones"
even earned an Oscar.
Only in 1960, with his scripts
for the blockbuster films
"Spartacus" and "Exodus," was
Trumbo
able to work openly again.
Bryan Cranston, who plays Trumbo
in the new film, is best known
for his role as Walter
White in the TV drama "Breaking
Bad." He and Trumbo director Jay
Roach joined me to speak
about the film and the
man it was based on.
I asked Cranston what
attracted him to the script.
BRYAN CRANSTON, Actor: And this
was an amazing story about the
jeopardy of the First Amendment
rights to an industry, the
Hollywood film industry, that
wasn't used to being scrutinized
like that.
And the ripple effect that the
eventual blacklist had on that
community was profound. And the
character himself of Dalton
Trumbo was just bigger than
life, dramatic, flamboyant. He
was a contrarian. He could be
very irascible. He was a pretty
hard drinker and a chain smoker.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, constantly
throughout the film.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Constantly.
JEFFREY BROWN: How did you fill
in -- you have to take this
individual, right, but fill
it in to a kind of history
that is real history.
JAY ROACH, Director,
"Trumbo": yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: How much did you
know? How much did you fill in?
JAY ROACH: It was more about
extracting from this incredibly
complex story, a 13-year story,
to distill it down to something
that was accessible.
And that really -- I have to
credit our great screenwriter
who told the story about a
screenwriter.
John McNamara had -- had done a
few things to make it more sort
of relatable and manageable
by doing a couple
composite characters.
Louis C.K. plays a guy who
represents two of three of the
blacklisted writers. And there
are a few choices like that that
just made it a story you could
tell in two hours.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have to
dramatize it. Do you also -- you
also have responsibility to
the history.
JAY ROACH: Of course, and -- but
the main responsibility, I
think, is to get to the
essence of what mattered to
these people and to the battle
itself, who they were up
against,
how the obstacles related,
and how they overcame them.
You are always going to --
there's never been a -- quote,
unquote -- "historical film"
that
didn't have to vary from the
beat-by-beat reality of it. But
as long as you stay true
to the essence of what the
people are up to, I think it's
-- I think it becomes very
authentic.
And we did a tremendous amount
of research. We spoke to the
daughters of Trumbo. We spoke
to Kirk Douglas. We read every
possible book and saw every
possible bit of film or radio
that we -- and
listened to radio.
JEFFREY BROWN: Very complicated
character, right, I mean, larger
than life in many ways,
big in many ways, committed, and
yet loving a kind of life,
right?
BRYAN CRANSTON: He was a
very idiosyncratic man.
He was a member of the American
Communist Party. He was very
compassionate about workers'
rights. He led a lot of strikes
when he was young, especially
for himself, in a bakery
when he was very young. And he
was very much a pro-worker
individual.
But he also loved being a
wealthy man. He was the highest
paid screenwriter in the '40s,
and that tantamount to saying
the highest paid writer in the
world. And he loved that
idea.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you enjoy the
contradiction of that, I mean,
as an actor?
BRYAN CRANSTON: Oh, as an
actor, it's juicy, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Any time -- any
time someone makes an emphatic
statement and then goes
against it, it's like -- it's
quite fun to play both sides of
those things.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's -- I want
the play one scene. This is you
as Dalton Trumbo and Louis
C.K., who you just mentioned,
talking about this very thing.
Right?
Let's watch that.
LOUIS C.K., Actor: No, you know
what it is? I don't trust you.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Well, I would
say go on, but I'm afraid you
will.
LOUIS C.K.: Look, I know what I
am. OK? I want this whole
country to be different top
to bottom. If I get what I want,
nobody gets their own lake.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Well, that would
be a very dull life, don't you
think?
LOUIS C.K.: Yes, for you, not
for the guys who built this. If
I'm wrong, tell me, but
ever since I know you, you talk
like a radical, but you live
like a rich guy.
BRYAN CRANSTON: That is true.
LOUIS C.K.: Well, I don't know
that you're -- I don't think
you're willing to lose all
of this just to do
the right thing.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Well, I despise
martyrdom, and I won't fight for
a lost cause. So, you're
right. I'm not willing to lose
it all, certainly not them.
But I am willing to risk it all.
That's where the radical and the
rich guy make a perfect
combination. The radical may
fight with the purity of Jesus,
but the rich guy wins with
the cunning of Satan.
LOUIS C.K.: Oh.
BRYAN CRANSTON: What?
LOUIS C.K.: Just please shut up.
JEFFREY BROWN: This movie puts
-- well, puts the wider culture
under a microscope, right,
under scrutiny, but also
Hollywood, which often doesn't
-- which doesn't come off
looking
all that well, for
the most part.
JAY ROACH: Hollywood turned
on itself in those days.
There was a group of people,
Hedda Hopper, Walt Disney -- Ayn
Rand came and helped them
out, some other directors, who
felt these writers were
polluting the minds of Americans
through mainstream Hollywood
movies, even though some of
them, like Trumbo, was a war
correspondent, had written
"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo" and
"A Guy Named Joe," very
patriotic,
almost pro-war films, were
suddenly somehow seen as
traitors because they just had
different
political views. That's
all it turned into.
JEFFREY BROWN: He
went to prison.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Mm-hmm.
JEFFREY BROWN: He had to write
under a pseudonym. In the end,
he got the recognition. How do
you end up seeing him years
later? How do you look -- how do
you see him?
BRYAN CRANSTON: You know, a lot
of people will look back and say
that he's a hero. There
are other people who will say,
he was no hero, he's a dirty red
commie or whatever.
And I suppose the point of the
movie is that all opinions are
welcome. All opinions should
be heard.
I don't think Dalton Trumbo
would look at himself as a hero.
I think he would -- he
was practicing self-defense. He
didn't want this fight. The
fight came to him. He was
subpoenaed to testify, under the
threat of incarceration, and
forced to let his First
Amendment rights
go by the wayside.
And he thought that -- that the
questions themselves were
un-American. And he kept asking:
"Have I committed a crime? Do
you have any evidence that I
have committed some crime?
I would love to hear that."
But that wasn't
part of the agenda.
JAY ROACH: I thought, at least
as a person who didn't succumb
and who was victorious,
in that he kept writing until he
embarrassed the studios, wins
two Academy Awards, writes
"Spartacus" and "Exodus," and
suddenly helps break the
blacklist.
So, there is definitely, to me,
something heroic about that.
BRYAN CRANSTON: And -- but along
with that was a tremendous
amount of pain and suffering.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
BRYAN CRANSTON: People who not
only were not able to -- were --
taken away their personal
freedoms, sent to jail, or taken
away their ability to pursue
their own career, which
means you cannot
support your family.
It put tremendous pressure on
families. Marriages broke up.
Families dissipated, loss of
homes.
There were some suicides. Even
when you think of the ripple
effect and how far it goes,
the bullying of the children
going to school, who don't
understand what's going on, but
they're -- they know
that something is wrong.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
The film is "Trumbo."
Bryan Cranston and Jay Roach,
thank you both very much.
BRYAN CRANSTON: Thanks.
JAY ROACH: Thanks. Thanks a lot.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in later
tonight for the PBS documentary
"Debt of Honor." The film
tells the history of America's
war injured, beginning with
stories from the men who served
and were injured in the
Revolutionary War, and
continuing with veterans of the
current
conflicts in Afghanistan and
Iraq. Check your local listings
for the time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Darrell Jones spent the
first 20 years of his career
serving his country as a
sergeant in the Air Force. Now
he's in the second stage,
serving
as a middle school history
teacher in Mississippi.
In honor of Veterans Day
tomorrow, we asked vets who
teach to share their experiences
in America's classrooms. You can
find those essays on our home
page. That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.